# Meta

 - RFC Name: Couchbase Full Text Search Index Query (FTS)
 - RFC ID: 0010-fulltext
 - Start Date: 2016-03-04
 - Owner: Michael Nitschinger, Simon Baslé
 - Current Status: ACCEPTED

# Summary
This RFC describes the SDK API and behavior exposure of the Couchbase Server Full Text Search (FTS) capabilities, shipping with Couchbase Server 4.5 ("watson"). It describes both the user-facing APIs, as well as the protocol level details which are needed to implement the APIs.

**Table of Contents:**

<!-- TOC depthFrom:1 depthTo:4 withLinks:1 updateOnSave:1 orderedList:0 -->

- [Meta](#meta)
- [Summary](#summary)
- [Motivation](#motivation)
- [General Design](#general-design)
	- [1. Query Type Overview](#1-query-type-overview)
	- [2. High Level API Overview](#2-high-level-api-overview)
	- [3. Request Query Options](#3-request-query-options)
		- [3.1. Search Request Params](#31-search-request-params)
			- [Limit](#limit)
			- [Skip](#skip)
			- [Explain](#explain)
			- [Highlighting](#highlighting)
			- [Fields](#fields)
			- [Facets](#facets)
			- [Server Side Timeout](#server-side-timeout)
			- [Query Consistency](#query-consistency)
		- [3.2. Common Query Options](#32-common-query-options)
			- [Boosting](#boosting)
		- [3.3. Match Query Options](#33-match-query-options)
			- [Match](#match)
			- [Field](#field)
			- [Analyzer](#analyzer)
			- [Prefix Length](#prefix-length)
			- [Fuzziness](#fuzziness)
		- [3.4. Match Phrase Query Options](#34-match-phrase-query-options)
			- [Match Phrase](#match-phrase)
			- [Field](#field)
			- [Analyzer](#analyzer)
		- [3.5. Regexp Query Options](#35-regexp-query-options)
			- [Regexp](#regexp)
			- [Field](#field)
		- [3.6. Query String Query Options](#36-query-string-query-options)
			- [Match](#match)
		- [3.7. Numeric Range Query Options](#37-numeric-range-query-options)
			- [Min](#min)
			- [Max](#max)
			- [Field](#field)
		- [3.8. Date Range Query Options](#38-date-range-query-options)
			- [Start](#start)
			- [End](#end)
			- [DateTime Parser](#datetime-parser)
			- [Field](#field)
		- [3.9. Compound Queries - Conjunction Query](#39-compound-queries-conjunction-query)
		- [3.10. Compound Queries - Disjunction Query](#310-compound-queries-disjunction-query)
			- [Min](#min)
		- [3.11. Compound Queries - Boolean Query](#311-compound-queries-boolean-query)
			- [ShouldMin](#shouldmin)
		- [3.12. Wildcard Query Options](#312-wildcard-query-options)
			- [Wildcard](#wildcard)
			- [Field](#field)
		- [3.13. DocId Query Options](#313-docid-query-options)
			- [DocIds constructor parameter](#docids-constructor-parameter)
		- [3.14. Boolean Field Query Options](#314-boolean-field-query-options)
			- [Boolean value](#boolean-value)
			- [Field](#field)
		- [3.15. Term Query Options](#315-term-query-options)
			- [Term](#term)
			- [Field](#field)
			- [Fuzziness](#fuzziness)
			- [Prefix Length](#prefix-length)
		- [3.16. Phrase Query Options](#316-phrase-query-options)
			- [Terms](#terms)
			- [Field](#field)
		- [3.17. Prefix Query Options](#317-prefix-query-options)
			- [Prefix](#prefix)
			- [Field](#field)
		- [3.19. MatchAll Query Options](#319-matchall-query-options)
		- [3.20. MatchNone Query Options](#320-matchnone-query-options)
	- [4. Search Response](#4-search-response)
		- [4.1. Status and Errors](#41-status-and-errors)
			- [The HTTP 400 case](#the-http-400-case)
			- [The HTTP 412 case](#the-http-412-case)
			- [Execution Error Handling](#execution-error-handling)
		- [4.2. Hits](#42-hits)
			- [Explanations](#explanations)
			- [Locations](#locations)
			- [Fragments](#fragments)
			- [Fields](#fields)
		- [4.3. Metrics](#43-metrics)
		- [4.4. Facet Results](#44-facet-results)
			- [Term Facet Results](#term-facet-results)
			- [Numeric Range Facet Results](#numeric-range-facet-results)
			- [Date Range Facet Results](#date-range-facet-results)
- [Language Specifics](#language-specifics)
		- [Set-Up for Examples](#set-up-for-examples)
		- [Java](#java)
		- [.NET](#net)
		- [NodeJS](#nodejs)
		- [Go](#go)
		- [C](#c)
		- [PHP](#php)
		- [Python](#python)
- [Signoff](#signoff)

<!-- /TOC -->

# Motivation
Couchbase Server 4.5 ships with FTS support and to provide first-class support for our users and customers we need to properly expose it in the SDK APIs.

Note that this RFC does only deal with index querying, not index maintenance and administration.

# General Design
The general design of using FTS is to expose a "fluent API", similar to other newer features like subdoc. The fluent pattern works very well in the FTS case because the user needs to craft the request out of a list of (sometimes complex) options. A properly designed API can guide the user the right way and also prevent invalid query option inputs, by having constructors take the mandatory parameters and have optional parameters introduced through setters that can be chained.

## 1. Query Type Overview

There are different types of queries which can be executed, some of them (compound queries) contain other queries in them. They all provide a common set of options and then each one has a unique option set. The following provides an overview of the supported query types by the server. Each of them will be detailed later in the request building section.

Simple Queries:

 - **Match Query:** A match query analyzes the input text and uses that analyzed text to query the index.
 - **Match Phrase Query:** The input text is analyzed and a phrase query is built with the terms resulting from the analysis.
 - **Regexp Query:** Finds documents containing terms that match the specified regular expression.
 - **Query String Query:** The query string query allows humans to describe complex queries using a simple syntax.
 - **Wildcard Query:** Interprets * and ? wildcards as found in a lot of applications, for an easy implementation of such a search feature.
 - **DocId Query:** Allows to restrict matches to a set of specific documents.
 - **Boolean Field Query:** Allow to match `true`/`false` in a field mapped as boolean.

Range Queries:

 - **Date Range Query:** The date range query finds documents containing a date value in the specified field within the specified range.
 - **Numeric Range Query:** The numeric range query finds documents containing a numeric value in the specified field within the specified range.

Compound Queries:

 - **Conjunction Query:** Result documents must satisfy all of the child queries.
 - **Disjunction Query:** Result documents must satisfy a configurable min number of child queries.
 - **Boolean Query:** The boolean query is a useful combination of conjunction and disjunction queries.

Some queries are more limited and usually used for debugging purposes:

 - **TermQuery:** A query that looks for **exact** matches of the term in the index (no analyzer, no stemming). Useful to check what the actual content of the index is. It can also apply fuzziness on the term. Usual better alternative is `MatchQuery`.
 - **Prefix Query:** The prefix query finds documents containing terms that start with the provided prefix. Usual better alternative is `MatchQuery`.
 - **PhraseQuery:** A query that looks for **exact** match of several terms (in the exact order) in the index. Usual better alternative is `MatchPhraseQuery`.
 - **MatchAllQuery:** A query that matches all indexed documents.
 - **MatchNoneQuery:** A query that matches nothing.

## 2. High Level API Overview
This section describes how the overall API looks like.

The search service is an HTTP endpoint that accepts `POST` requests. The url of the endpoint determine the FTS index to be queried, while the body of the request contains a `JSON` representation of the FTS query to perform:

> **POST** /api/index/`{indexName}`/query

For both bucket and cluster level, the approach is the same. Right now only Bucket level is defined in this RFC.

A FTS query, at the top level, is composed of an `index name`, a `query` and
optional `search parameters` (that apply to the search as a whole). Since other
querying APIs at the `Bucket` level all take a single object as input
(`ViewQuery`, `N1qlQuery`...), the FTS API should do the same in a `SearchQuery`
"wrapper" class. Query-level optional parameters should be held by the
`SearchQuery` itself, in which case it would offer a fluent API to easily set
each parameter. The Bucket API thus only takes a `SearchQuery`:

```java
public SearchQuery(String indexName, AbstractFtsQuery queryPart);

SearchQuery q = new SearchQuery("index", queryPart)
    .limit(5); //top level parameter

bucket.query(q);
```

All query types described below must implement a common marker interface or base class in the (including compound queries since they can be nested too). For example, the base class could be named `AbstractFtsQuery `. It only serves as a mean to restrict what goes into the "query" part of a request and should not be instantiated by the user.

`AbstractFtsQuery` are composites (you can nest queries inside some specific query types), and the search parameters (like limit, explain) are only expected at top level of the payload, hence the separation of `AbstractFtsQuery ` and optional parameters inside the `SearchQuery`.

Here is an example of a String query with some search params, on index `beer-index`:

```java
SearchQuery sq = new SearchQuery("beer-index",
    new StringQuery("description:awesome").boost(2) //boost only applies to the stringQuery
)
.limit(5); //top level parameter

bucket.query(sq);
```

If idiomatic to the language, it makes sense to provide static factory methods (or similar helpers) to guide the user in the right direction since there are many different query options available. These should be exposed on the bucket-level wrapper class. So for example the `SearchQuery` can contain factory methods in a form like this:

```java
bucket.query(new SearchQuery("beer-index", SearchQuery.string("+water +abv:>10")).limit(5));
```

This removes cognitive load, since the user only needs to remember "SearchQuery" and will have all supported query methods available immediately.

`AbstractFtsQuery` will be represented as a JSON Object under the `query` top-level attribute, while each other individual tuning of the `SearchQuery` will have its own top-level attribute in the JSON payload:

```json
{
    "query": { "represented by": "AbstractFtsQuery" },
    "limit": "this is a value from the SearchQuery parameters",
    "explain": "this is another value from the SearchQuery parameters"
}
```

In order to generate the JSON payload above, an `export()` method can be added to the `SearchQuery ` interface. It should generate the whole JSON payload, including parameters.

**IMPORTANT:** The `indexName` part of the request is not part of the payload but rather determines which HTTP endpoint to hit.

## 3. Request Query Options

### 3.1. Search Request Params
All options described in this section are not bound to a specific search option, but rather treated as a separate param set as an optional argument. They affect the query as a whole, independent of the actual search method (including compound queries) used.

They are part of the `SearchQuery` object and can be used optionally by the user, by chaining their corresponding setters in a fluent manner. The setters all return the `SearchQuery` instance, for chaining.

**Except for the `server side timeout`**, all other parameters can be omitted in the request payload if the user hasn't modified them, as they'll take a default value on the server side when not explicitly set.

`someSearchQuery.limit(1).skip(5).explain()`

#### Limit
The `limit` option limits the number of matches returned from the complete result set. The actual HTTP query field is called `size`, but to match it with N1QL and Views it makes sense to name it similarly.

| Builder Name | Request Path | Wire Type | Default | Constraints |
| ------------ | ------------ | --------- | ------- | ----------- |
| `limit(int limit)` | `size` | JSON Number | - | >  0 |

**Examples:** `.limit(10)`

#### Skip
The `skip` option indicates how many matches are skipped on the result set before starting to return the matches. The actual HTTP query field is called `from`, but to match it with N1QL and Views it makes sense to name it similarly.

| Builder Name | Request Path | Wire Type | Default | Constraints |
| ------------ | ------------ | --------- | ------- | ----------- |
| `skip(int skip)` | `from` | JSON Number | - | >  0 |

**Examples:** `.skip(5)`

#### Explain
The boolean `explain` field triggers inclusion of additional search result score explanations.

| Builder Name | Request Path | Wire Type | Default | Constraints |
| ------------ | ------------ | --------- | ------- | ----------- |
| `explain()` | `explain` | JSON Boolean | false | -|



#### Highlighting
This option allows the user to specify optional highlighting of the result set. It allows to both set the `style` and the `fields` to highlight. Highlighting is disabled by default. In the response, highlights are represented in the "`fragments`" section of each hit.


| Builder Name | Request Path | Wire Type | Default | Constraints |
| ------------ | ------------ | --------- | ------- | ----------- |
| `highlight(HighlightStyle style, [String... fields])` | `highlight` | JSON Object `{"style": "foo", "fields": ["fa", "fb"]}` | deactivated | -|

The `HighlightStyle` is an enumeration (or similar with a fixed set of possible values) which describes the highlighters the Server supports. The following options are available:

```java
enum HighlightStyle {
  HTML, // maps to "html" on the wire
  ANSI  // maps to "ansi" on the wire
}
```

Both `style` and `field` are optional. If no `field` is provided FTS will just highlight all fields where there is a match. Some languages might need to support a `null` style for the combination where no style is requested, but specific fields are.

**Examples:**
```java
.highlight(HighlightStyle.HTML)
.highlight(HighlightStyle.HTML, "description", "name")
.highlight()
.highlight(null, "description", "name")
```

#### Fields
This option describes a list of field values which should be retrieved for result documents, provided they
were stored while indexing.

| Builder Name | Request Path | Wire Type | Default | Constraints |
| ------------ | ------------ | --------- | ------- | ----------- |
| `fields(String... fields)` | `fields` | JSON Array (of strings) `...,"fields": ["a", "b"],...` | no fields | -|

**Examples:** `.fields("description", "name")`


#### Facets
Facets allow to aggregate information collected on a particular result set.

The `size`/`limit` parameter drives how many categories are returned (only the top n categories are returned, by number of matching documents, even if the facet definition sets up more than n categories).

Currently there are three different types of facets supported:

 - Term Facet: A term facet categorizes the matching documents into categories given by the values in a particular field.
 - Numeric Range Facet: A numeric range facet works by the user defining their own numeric categories, or buckets. The facet then counts how many of the matching documents fall into a particular range for the faceted field.
 - Date Range Facet: same as numeric, but on dates instead of numbers.

Note that lower boundaries are inclusive, while upper boundaries are exclusive. Ranges can also overlap (so a document can fall eg. in two overlapping date ranges). The application should expect that some documents are counted into multiple facet buckets in this case, so the sum of facet counts wouldn't match the total number of hits for instance.

A facet is added to the `SearchQuery` by providing a name for it and a `SearchFacet` value.

| Builder Name | Request Path | Wire Type | Default | Constraints |
| ------------ | ------------ | --------- | ------- | ----------- |
| `addFacet(String name, SearchFacet facet)`    | `facets`     | JSON Object of Objects `{name: {facet}, name: {facet}...}` | no facets | For a single facet, either `numeric_ranges` or `date_ranges` is allowed. If omitted it is a term facet. |

Calling `addFacet` several times in a row is additive: new facets are added to
an underlying collection of facets. If a facet is added with the same name as an
existing one, it overwrites it (so the recommended backing collection for facets
would be a `Map` or other similar structure). For languages that support
providing multiple name-facet pairs, it can be offered to add several facets
with a single method call.

The 3 types of facets have corresponding implementations. If it makes sense in the language of the SDK, it can be substituted with a static factory method, eg. in the `SearchFacet` class.

| Facet Type | Factory Method | Range Wire Format |
| ---------- | -------------- | ----------------- |
| term       | `SearchFacet.term(field, size)` | - |
| numeric    | `SearchFacet.numeric(field, size)` | `[ { "name": name of range (string), "min": inclusive lower bound (float), "max": exclusive upper bound (float) } ]` |
| date       | `SearchFacet.date(field, size)` | `[ { "name": name of range (string), "start": "2011-08-30T13:22:53.108Z", "end": "... quoted string rfc 3339" } ]`  |

At a minimum, each `{facet}` has a `field`. The size drives the number of facets/categories returned. Numeric facets also have an array `numeric_ranges` of **at least one** `{numericRange}` objects.
Date faces instead have an array `date_ranges` of **at least one** `{dateRange}` objects. See following wire examples for term, numeric and date:

```json
"facets": {
    "myTermFacet": {
        "field": "fieldName",
        "size": 3
    }
}
```

`min` and `max` are optional, but at least one of the two should be provided. `name` is technically optional but having several ranges without a name can confuse things, so it is recommended to make it mandatory in the API:

```json
"facets": {
    "myNumericFacet": {
        "field": "fieldName",
        "size": 2,
        "numeric_ranges": [
            { "name":"range1", "min": 0.1, "max": 3.0 },
            { "name":"range2", "min": 3.1 }
        ]
    }
}
```

`start` and `end` are optional, but at least one of the two should be provided. `name` is technically optional in the request but it is recommended to make it mandatory in the API:

```json
"facets": {
    "myDateFacet": {
        "field": "fieldName",
        "size": 2,
        "date_ranges": [
            { "name":"old", "end": "2016-01-01T00:00:00"},
            { "name":"thisYear", "start": "2016-01-01T00:00:01"},
            { "name":"theYear2011", "start": "2011-01-01T00:00:00", "end": "2011-12-31T23:59:59"}
        ]
    }
}
```

However, to facilitate dynamic creation of facets, the addition of the first and subsequent ranges should be offered through a `addRange` method, in a fluent manner: the `addRange` would return the facet instance, allowing method chaining.

**Examples:**

```java
.addFacet("type", SearchFacet.term("category", 5))

.addFacet("strength", SearchFacet.numeric("abv", 3)
    .addRange("strong", 5, null)
    .addRange("middle", 3.1, 4.99)
    .addRange("light", 0, 3.0));

.addFacet("age", SearchFacet.date("updated", 2)
    .addRange("old", null, "2016-01-01T00:00:00")
    .addRange("thisYear", "2016-01-01T00:00:01")
	.addRange("theYear2011", "2011-01-01T00:00:00", "2011-12-31T23:59:59"));
```

Note that if the ranges are constructed without a name, or without providing at least one bound, a `NullPointerException` or equivalent should be raised at construction of the range object.

Similarly, if no range is provided for a date or numeric facet, an exception should be raised at execution time, before the request is sent over the wire.

#### Server Side Timeout
The server side timeout allows to specify an upper boundary of request execution so
that it potentially doesn't run infinitely.

The timeout is expressed as a `long`, a number of `milliseconds` on the wire. SDKs where this is  relevant can substitute this with a more idiomatic / rich representation of duration (eg. in .NET a `TimeSpan` instance, in Java a pair of `long` and `TimeUnit`, as long as the representation can be converted to an amount of milliseconds.

Note that like N1QL, if the user hasn't set a custom timeout, the SDK **must pass the client side timeout** down automatically, since there is no point in running the request if no one
is listening anymore.

The timeout is set inside a sub-object of the search parameters, the control object "`ctl`" (which also bears the query consistency control parameter, see next section).

| Builder Name | Request Path | Wire Type | Default | Constraints |
| ------------ | ------------ | --------- | ------- | ----------- |
| `.serverSideTimeout(long timeout)` | `ctl.timeout` | JSON Number (positive and > 0) in milliseconds | client side timeout (75 seconds) | must be greater than 0 |

**Examples:** `.serverSideTimeout(long timeout)` // or equivalent timeout abstraction whatever is used in the SDK

#### Query Consistency
A FTS request can be tuned in terms of consistency, just has views can be tuned through the "stale" parameter and N1QL through "searchConsistency" and "consistentWith".

This is represented on the wire by the `consistency.level` parameter in the `ctl` object. FTS recognizes two levels:

 - `""` (the empty string): stale data is ok
 - `"at_plus"`: consistency at least at or beyond the consistency vector but not before (see below).

Note that REQUEST_PLUS is slated for spock ([MB-18428]( https://issues.couchbase.com/browse/MB-18428)).

For `at_plus`, a second parameter named "`consistency.vectors`" contains the consistency vector for each index (a JSON object keyed by FTS index name). A single vector is also a JSON object. The keys are in the `"vbucketId/vbucketUUID"` format (can be built from a `MutationToken`) and the values are `long` seqno sequence numbers:

```json
{
    "ctl": {
        "consistency": {
            "level": "at_plus",
            "vectors": {
                "beer-index": {
                    "59": 2,
                    "50/51102891220927": 2
                }
            }
        }
    }
}
```

FTS also accepts keys in a `"vbucketId"` only format, but the id+UUID format above is prefered in the SDK implementation.

In code, this should look like what we already have in N1QL for `AT_PLUS`:

| Builder Name | Request Path | Wire Type | Default | Constraints |
| ------------ | ------------ | --------- | ------- | ----------- |
| `.searchConsistency(SearchConsistency enum)` | `ctl.consistency.level` | string | `""` | restricted to consistency that don't have a parameter, for now only `NOT_BOUNDED` (in the future `REQUEST_PLUS` as well) |
| `.consistentWith(JsonDocument... docs)` | `ctl.consistency.level` <p>`ctl.consistency.vectors` | "at_plus" and JSON Object | - | forces level `"at_plus"` and sets the vector from documents' mutation tokens |
| `.consistentWith(DocumentFragment... frags)` | `ctl.consistency.level` <p> `ctl.consistency.vectors` | "at_plus" and JSON Object | - | forces level `"at_plus"` and sets the vector from document fragments' mutation tokens |

The consistency enum should be dedicated to FTS with single value `NOT_BOUNDED`
for now. If should be named `SearchConsistency` to better distinguish it from
the one for N1QL (note that the two enums may converge in the future).

When using the builder, the last consistency-related method used "wins". For
example using `consistentWith(...)` followed by `searchConsistency(NOT_BOUNDED)`
will result in empty `level` and no `vectors`. However, using the
`consistentWith` method with a document/fragment that *doesn't have a
`MutationToken`* is an immediate runtime error.

When building the `vectors` object, if there are tokens that map to an existing
vbucketId/UUID key, the largest seqno must be kept.

If the `MutationState` aggregator from the [**`AT_PLUS RFC`**]() is implemented,
it should be accepted as a third possible input for `consistentWith()` and used
internally. An `exportForFts()` method will be added to the class that marshals
the `MutationState` to the FTS format described here.

**Examples:**

```java
.searchConsistency(SearchConsistency.NOT_BOUNDED) // level = "", no vectors
.consistentWith(doc1, doc2, doc3) // level = "at_plus", vectors constructed from mutation tokens
```

### 3.2. Common Query Options
The following list of options are available for every type of query below (including compound queries).

#### Boosting
The boost parameter is used to increase the relative weight of a clause (with a boost greater than 1) or decrease the relative weight (with a boost between 0 and 1).

| Builder Name | Request Path | Wire Type | Default | Constraints |
| ------------ | ------------ | --------- | ------- | ----------- |
| `boost(double boost)` | `query.boost` | JSON Number | - | `>= 0` |

**Examples:** `.boost(1.5)`, `.boost(0.3)`

### 3.3. Match Query Options
A match query is like a term query, but the input text is analyzed first. An attempt is made to use the same analyzer that was used when the field was indexed.

```java
new MatchQuery("salty beers").analyzer("custom_analyzer").boost(1.0).fuzziness(2)
```

#### Match
The input string to be matched against. The match string is required.

| Builder Name | Request Path | Wire Type | Default | Constraints |
| ------------ | ------------ | --------- | ------- | ----------- |
| `new MatchQuery(String match)` | `query.match` | JSON String | - | must not be empty |

**Examples:** `new MatchQuery("salty beers")`

#### Field
If a field is specified, only terms in that field will be matched. This can also affect the used analyzer if one isn't specified explicitly.

| Builder Name | Request Path | Wire Type | Default | Constraints |
| ------------ | ------------ | --------- | ------- | ----------- |
| `field(String field)` | `query.field` | JSON String | - | - |

**Examples:** `.field("fieldname")`

#### Analyzer

Analyzers are used to transform input text into a stream of tokens for indexing. The Server comes with built-in analyzers and the users can create their own. The string here is the name of the analyzer used.

| Builder Name | Request Path | Wire Type | Default | Constraints |
| ------------ | ------------ | --------- | ------- | ----------- |
| `analyzer(String analyzer)` | `query.analyzer` | JSON String | - | - |

**Examples:** `.analyzer("my_cool_analyzer")`

#### Prefix Length
This parameter can be used to require that the term also have the same prefix of the specified length.

| Builder Name | Request Path | Wire Type | Default | Constraints |
| ------------ | ------------ | --------- | ------- | ----------- |
| `prefixLength(int length)` | `query.prefix_length` | JSON Number | - | if 0 not used, must never be negative. |

**Examples:** `.prefixLength(5)`

#### Fuzziness
The match query can optionally perform fuzzy matching. If the fuzziness parameter is set to a non-zero integer the analyzed text will be matched with the specified level of fuzziness.

| Builder Name | Request Path | Wire Type | Default | Constraints |
| ------------ | ------------ | --------- | ------- | ----------- |
| `fuzziness(int fuzziness)` | `query.fuzziness` | JSON Number | - | - |

**Examples:** `.fuzziness(1)`

### 3.4. Match Phrase Query Options
The input text is analyzed and a phrase query is built with the terms resulting from the analysis. This type of query searches for terms occurring in the specified positions and offsets. This depends on term vectors, which are consulted to determine phrase distance.

```java
new MatchPhraseQuery("salty beers").analyzer("custom_analyzer").boost(1.0)
```

#### Match Phrase
The input phrase to be matched against. The match phrase string is required.

| Builder Name | Request Path | Wire Type | Default | Constraints |
| ------------ | ------------ | --------- | ------- | ----------- |
| `new MatchPhraseQuery(String matchPhrase)` | `query.match_phrase` | JSON String | - | - |

**Examples:** `new MatchPhraseQuery("salty beers")`

#### Field
If a field is specified, only terms in that field will be matched. This can also affect the used analyzer if one isn't specified explicitly.

| Builder Name | Request Path | Wire Type | Default | Constraints |
| ------------ | ------------ | --------- | ------- | ----------- |
| `field(String field)` | `query.field` | JSON String | - | - |

**Examples:** `.field("fieldname")`

#### Analyzer

Analyzers are used to transform input text into a stream of tokens for indexing. The Server comes with built-in analyzers and the users can create their own. The string here is the name of the analyzer used.

| Builder Name | Request Path | Wire Type | Default | Constraints |
| ------------ | ------------ | --------- | ------- | ----------- |
| `analyzer(String analyzer)` | `query.analyzer` | JSON String | - | - |

**Examples:** `.analyzer("my_cool_analyzer")`


### 3.5. Regexp Query Options
Regexp query finds documents containing terms that match the specified regular expression.

Here is an example of a `regexp` query:

```java
new RegexpQuery("[A-Za-z0-9]")
```

#### Regexp
The regexp to be analyzed and used against. The regexp string is required.

| Builder Name | Request Path | Wire Type | Default | Constraints |
| ------------ | ------------ | --------- | ------- | ----------- |
| `(constructor argument) String regexp` | `query.regexp` | JSON String | - | - |

**Examples:** `new RegexpQuery("[A-Za-z0-9]")`

#### Field
If a field is specified, only terms in that field will be matched.

| Builder Name | Request Path | Wire Type | Default | Constraints |
| ------------ | ------------ | --------- | ------- | ----------- |
| `field(String field)` | `query.field` | JSON String | - | - |

**Examples:** `.field("fieldname")`

### 3.6. Query String Query Options
The query string query allows humans to describe complex queries using a simple syntax.

```java
new QueryStringQuery("description:water and some other stuff").boost(1)
```

#### Match
The query string to be analyzed and used against. The query string is required.


| Builder Name | Request Path | Wire Type | Default | Constraints |
| ------------ | ------------ | --------- | ------- | ----------- |
| `(constructor argument) String query` | `query.query` | JSON String | - | - |

**Examples:** `new QueryStringQuery("description:water and some other stuff")`

### 3.7. Numeric Range Query Options
The numeric range query finds documents containing a numeric value in the specified field within the specified range. Either min or max can be omitted, but not both.

#### Min
The lower end of the range, inclusive by default.

| Builder Name | Request Path | Wire Type | Default | Constraints |
| ------------ | ------------ | --------- | ------- | ----------- |
| `min(float min[, boolean inclusive])` | `query.min` & `query.inclusive_min` | JSON Number & JSON Boolean | min omitted, inclusive = true | - |

**Examples:** `.min(10, false)`

#### Max
The higher end of the range, exclusive by default.

| Builder Name | Request Path | Wire Type | Default | Constraints |
| ------------ | ------------ | --------- | ------- | ----------- |
| `max(float max[, boolean inclusive])` | `query.max` & `query.inclusive_max` | JSON Number & JSON Boolean | min omitted, inclusive = false | - |

**Examples:** `.max(500, true)`

#### Field
If a field is specified, only terms in that field will be matched.

| Builder Name | Request Path | Wire Type | Default | Constraints |
| ------------ | ------------ | --------- | ------- | ----------- |
| `field(String field)` | `query.field` | JSON String | - | - |

**Examples:** `.field("fieldname")`

### 3.8. Date Range Query Options
The date range query finds documents containing a date value in the specified field within the specified range. Either start or end can be omitted, but not both.

#### Start
The start date of the range, (inclusive by default).

| Builder Name | Request Path | Wire Type | Default | Constraints |
| ------------ | ------------ | --------- | ------- | ----------- |
| `start(String start[, boolean inclusive])` | `query.start` & `query.inclusive_start` | JSON String & JSON Boolean | start omitted, inclusive = true | - |

**Examples:** `.start("date format supported", false)`

#### End
The end date of the range, (exclusive by default).

| Builder Name | Request Path | Wire Type | Default | Constraints |
| ------------ | ------------ | --------- | ------- | ----------- |
| `end(String end[, boolean inclusive])` | `query.end` & `query.inclusive_end` | JSON String & JSON Boolean | end omitted, inclusive = false | - |

**Examples:** `.end("date format supported", true)`

#### DateTime Parser
This field enables one to specify a custom date time parser.

| Builder Name | Request Path | Wire Type | Default | Constraints |
| ------------ | ------------ | --------- | ------- | ----------- |
| `dateTimeParser(String name)` | `query.datetime_parser` | JSON String | - | - |

**Examples:** `.dateTimeParser("customParser")`

#### Field
If a field is specified, only terms in that field will be matched.

| Builder Name | Request Path | Wire Type | Default | Constraints |
| ------------ | ------------ | --------- | ------- | ----------- |
| `field(String field)` | `query.field` | JSON String | - | - |

**Examples:** `.field("fieldname")`

### 3.9. Compound Queries - Conjunction Query
The conjunction query is a compound query. The result documents must satisfy all of the child queries. It is possible to recursively nest compound queries.

At execution, a conjunction query that has no child queries should fail fast (eg. throw an exception before a request is sent to the server).

When idiomatic to the language, variable-length argument or lists of queries can also be accepted for each method (allowing to add several queries to the "AND" in one go).

```java
new ConjunctionQuery(AbstractFtsQuery queries....).and(AbstractFtsQuery... someMoreQueries)
```

| Builder Name | Request Path | Wire Type | Default | Constraints |
| ------------ | ------------ | --------- | ------- | ----------- |
| `(constructor argument) AbstractFtsQuery... queries` | `query.conjuncts` | JSON Array | - | - |
| `and(AbstractFtsQuery... moreQueries)` | `query.conjuncts` | JSON Array | - | - |

**Examples:** `new ConjunctionQuery(new StringQuery(...), new MatchQuery(...)).and(new TermQuery(...))`


### 3.10. Compound Queries - Disjunction Query
The disjunction query is a compound query. The result documents must satisfy a configurable min number of child queries. By default this min is set to 1.

At execution, a disjunction query that has fewer child queries than the configured minimum should fail fast (eg. throw an exception before a request is sent to the server). Similarly, a disjunction query without child queries should also fail fast.

When idiomatic to the language, variable-length argument or lists of queries can also be accepted for each method (allowing to add several queries to the "OR" in one go).

```java
new DisjunctionQuery(AbstractFtsQuery queries....).or(AbstractFtsQuery... moreQueries)
```

| Builder Name | Request Path | Wire Type | Default | Constraints |
| ------------ | ------------ | --------- | ------- | ----------- |
| `(constructor argument) AbstractFtsQuery... queries` | `query.disjuncts` | JSON Array | - | - |
| `or(AbstractFtsQuery... moreQueries` | `query.disjuncts` | JSON Array | - | - |

**Examples:** `new DisjunctionQuery(new StringQuery(...), new MatchQuery(...)).or(new TermQuery(...))`

**Example payload:** `{"query":{"disjuncts":[{"prefix":"someterm","boost":2.0}],"min":1, "boost": 3}}`

#### Min
The minimum number of child queries that must be satisfied for the disjunction query.

| Builder Name | Request Path | Wire Type | Default | Constraints |
| ------------ | ------------ | --------- | ------- | ----------- |
| `min(int min)` | `query.min` | JSON Number | 1 | - |

**Examples:** `.min(2)`


### 3.11. Compound Queries - Boolean Query
The boolean query is a useful combination of conjunction and disjunction queries. A boolean query takes three lists of queries:

 - must - result documents must satisfy all of these queries.
 - should - result documents should satisfy these queries.
 - must not - result documents must not satisfy any of these queries.

At execution, a boolean query that has no child queries in any 3 categories should fail fast (eg. throw an exception before a request is sent to the server).

The inner representation of child queries in the `must/must_not/should` sections are respectively a `ConjunctionQuery` and two `DisjunctionQuery`.

```java
new BooleanQuery().must(AbstractFtsQuery).should(AbstractFtsQuery).mustNot(AbstractFtsQuery)
```

| Builder Name | Request Path | Wire Type | Default | Constraints |
| ------------ | ------------ | --------- | ------- | ----------- |
| `must(AbstractFtsQuery... query)` | `query.must` | a `ConjunctionQuery` object of the must queries | - | - |
| `should(AbstractFtsQuery... query)` | `query.should` | a `DisjunctionQuery` object of the should queries | - | - |
| `mustNot(AbstractFtsQuery... query)` | `query.must_not` | a `DisjunctionQuery` object of the must_not queries | - | - |

When idiomatic to the language, variable-length argument or lists of queries can also be accepted for each method (allowing to add several queries to the categories in one go).

#### ShouldMin
If a hit satisfies at least `min` queries in the `should` section, its score will be boosted. By default, this is set to 1.

| Builder Name | Request Path | Wire Type | Default | Constraints |
| ------------ | ------------ | --------- | ------- | ----------- |
| `shouldMin(int min)` | `query.should.min` | JSON Number in the disjunction query object | 1 | - |

**Examples:** `.shouldMin(2)`

> This can be omitted if the underlying `DisjunctionQuery` is directly exposed and editable, or if a direct mean of setting the payload `should.min` is available (for instance in a language like Python).

### 3.12. Wildcard Query Options
A wildcard query is a query in which term the character `*` will match 0..n occurrences of any characters and `?` will match 1 occurrence of any character.

Here is an example of a `wildcard` query:

```java
new WildcardQuery("some*ter?")
```

#### Wildcard
The wildcard-containing term to be analyzed and searched. The wildcard string is required.

| Builder Name | Request Path | Wire Type | Default | Constraints |
| ------------ | ------------ | --------- | ------- | ----------- |
| `(constructor argument) String wildcard` | `query.wildcard` | JSON String | - | - |

**Examples:** `new WildcardQuery("some*ter?")`

#### Field
If a field is specified, only terms in that field will be matched.

| Builder Name | Request Path | Wire Type | Default | Constraints |
| ------------ | ------------ | --------- | ------- | ----------- |
| `field(String field)` | `query.field` | JSON String | - | - |

**Examples:** `.field("fieldname")`

### 3.13. DocId Query Options
A docId query is a query that directly matches the documents whose ID have been provided. It can be combined within a ConjunctionQuery to restrict matches on the set of documents.

Here is an example of a `docId` query:

```java
new DocIdQuery("id1", "id2")
```

When idiomatic to the language, variable-length argument or lists of queries can also be accepted for each method (allowing to add several IDs to considered list in one go). Progressive programmatic building of the list of IDs should be available, however.

#### DocIds constructor parameter
The list of document IDs to be restricted against. At least one ID is required at execution time, but a `DocIdQuery` should be constructible without one to allow progressive programmatic population of the ID list.

This builder method allows to **add** to the existing list of document IDs to be restricted against.

| Builder Name | Request Path | Wire Type | Default | Constraints |
| ------------ | ------------ | --------- | ------- | ----------- |
| `docIds(String... docIds)` | `query.ids` | JSON Array of strings | - | - |

**Examples:** `new DocIdQuery("id1").addDocIds("id2", "id3")`

### 3.14. Boolean Field Query Options
A boolean field query matches documents which have a boolean field which corresponds to the requested boolean value.

Here is an example of a `boolean field` query:

```java
new BooleanFieldQuery(true)
```

#### Boolean value
The boolean value to be looked for, required.

| Builder Name | Request Path | Wire Type | Default | Constraints |
| ------------ | ------------ | --------- | ------- | ----------- |
| `(constructor argument) boolean value` | `query.bool` | JSON boolean | - | - |

**Examples:** `new BooleanFieldQuery(true)`

#### Field
If a field is specified, only terms in that field will be matched. It should generally be encouraged to use the field, which must be a boolean field.

| Builder Name | Request Path | Wire Type | Default | Constraints |
| ------------ | ------------ | --------- | ------- | ----------- |
| `field(String field)` | `query.field` | JSON String | - | - |

**Examples:** `.field("fieldname")`

### 3.15. Term Query Options
The term query allows to directly query what is stored in the index, without applying any analyzer to the term. It is generally more useful in debugging scenarios, and the `Match Query` should usually be preferred for real-world use cases.

The term query can additionally perform "fuzzy querying" on the term by specifying a `fuzziness` factor (and optional `prefix_length`).

Here is an example of a `term` query:

```java
new TermQuery("someterm").field("fieldname").fuzziness(2).prefixLength(4)
```

#### Term
The mandatory term is the exact string that will be searched into the index. Note that the index can (and usually will) contain terms that are derived from the text in documents, as analyzers can apply process like stemming. For example, indexing "programming" could store "program" in the index. As a term query doesn't apply the analyzers, one would need to look for "program" to have a match on that index entry.

| Builder Name | Request Path | Wire Type | Default | Constraints |
| ------------ | ------------ | --------- | ------- | ----------- |
| `(constructor argument) String term` | `query.term` | JSON String | - | must not be empty |

**Examples:** `new TermQuery("program")`

#### Field
If a field is specified, only terms in that field will be matched.

| Builder Name | Request Path | Wire Type | Default | Constraints |
| ------------ | ------------ | --------- | ------- | ----------- |
| `field(String field)` | `query.field` | JSON String | - | - |

**Examples:** `.field("fieldname")`

#### Fuzziness
If a fuzziness is specified, variations of the term can be searched. Additionally, if fuzziness is enabled then the `prefix_length` parameter is also taken into account (see below).

For now the server interprets the fuzziness factor as a "Levenshtein edit distance" to apply on the term.

| Builder Name | Request Path | Wire Type | Default | Constraints |
| ------------ | ------------ | --------- | ------- | ----------- |
| `fuzziness(int factor)` | `query.fuzziness` | JSON Number | - | int, omitted in payload if 0 / not set |

#### Prefix Length
The prefix length only makes sense when fuzziness is enabled (see above). It allows to apply the `fuzziness` only on the part of the `term` that is after the `prefix_length` character mark.

For example, with the term "something" and a prefix length of 4, only the "thing" part of the term will be fuzzy-searched, and hits **must** start with "some".

| Builder Name | Request Path | Wire Type | Default | Constraints |
| ------------ | ------------ | --------- | ------- | ----------- |
| `prefixLength(int length)` | `query.prefix_length` | JSON Number | 0 | in, must be present if and only if fuzziness is present |

### 3.16. Phrase Query Options
The phrase query allows to query for exact term phrases in the index. The provided terms must exist in the correct order, at the correct index offsets, in the specified field (as no analyzer are applied to the terms). Queried field must have been indexed with inncludeTermVectors set to true. It is generally more useful in debugging scenarios, and the `Match Phrase Query` should usually be preferred for real-world use cases.

Here is an example of a `phrase` query:

```java
new PhraseQuery("some", "term").field("fieldname")
```

#### Terms
The mandatory list of terms that must exactly match in the index. Note that the index can (and usually will) contain terms that are derived from the text in documents, as analyzers can apply process like stemming. For example, indexing "programming books" could store "program" and "book" in the index. As a phrase query doesn't apply the analyzers, one would need to look for "program book" to have a match on that indexed document.

| Builder Name | Request Path | Wire Type | Default | Constraints |
| ------------ | ------------ | --------- | ------- | ----------- |
| `(constructor argument) String... terms` | `query.terms` | JSON Array of Strings | - | array size > 1, entries must not be empty|

**Examples:** `new PhraseQuery("program", "book")`

#### Field
If a field is specified, only terms in that field will be matched.

| Builder Name | Request Path | Wire Type | Default | Constraints |
| ------------ | ------------ | --------- | ------- | ----------- |
| `field(String field)` | `query.field` | JSON String | - | - |

**Examples:** `.field("fieldname")`

### 3.17. Prefix Query Options
The prefix query finds documents containing terms that start with the provided prefix.
```java
new PrefixQuery("foo")
```

#### Prefix
The prefix to be analyzed and used against. The prefix string is required.

| Builder Name | Request Path | Wire Type | Default | Constraints |
| ------------ | ------------ | --------- | ------- | ----------- |
| `(constructor argument) String prefix` | `query.prefix` | JSON String | - | - |

**Examples:** `new PrefixQuery("foo")`

#### Field
If a field is specified, only terms in that field will be matched.

| Builder Name | Request Path | Wire Type | Default | Constraints |
| ------------ | ------------ | --------- | ------- | ----------- |
| `field(String field)` | `query.field` | JSON String | - | - |

**Examples:** `.field("fieldname")`

### 3.19. MatchAll Query Options
A match all query matches all documents in the index. It can take search parameters as other queries, so this can be restricted (eg. with `limit`).

Here is an example of a `matchAll` query:

```java
new MatchAllQuery()
```

The JSON representation of a `MatchAllQuery` is simply a `"match_all": null` entry in the query JSON Object.

### 3.20. MatchNone Query Options
A match none query doesn't match any document in the index. Here is an example:

```java
new MatchNoneQuery()
```

The JSON representation of a `MatchNoneQuery` is simply a `"match_none": null` entry in the query JSON Object.


## 4. Search Response

As of Watson GA, three response cases can occur:

 1. **the request is well-formed**: a `HTTP 200` is returned. The `Content-Type` of the response is `application/json` (note the actual header will also contain the API version, eg. `application/json;version=1.0.0`). This response can be returned either when all was successful or when some errors happened **during execution** (see section 4.1).
 2. **the request is malformed**: a `HTTP 400` error is returned. The `Content-Type` is `text/plain; charset=utf-8` and the body of the response contains a dump of the incriminating query, the Go stacktrace of the error and ends in an error message. It **should** be possible to extract a top level error message by extracting the string after the last occurrence of "`, err:`" (last line in body).
 3. **the request consistency could not be satisfied in time**: a `HTTP 412` error is returned if the consistency could not be satisfied within the given timeout. The `Content-Type` is `text/plain; charset=utf-8` and the body of the response contains a form of trace. It appears difficult to extract a meaningful message from this body at the time of Watson GA, so it is recommended the SDKs come up with a standard error message instead.

The following description of the response format focuses on case 1 above. Like with N1Ql and Views the search response can be separated into the actual returned rows and associated metadata.

```
SearchQueryResult {
  "status": {
    "total": long
    "failed": long
    "successful": long
    "errors": [ string, ... ] //optional
  },
  "request": {JSON object}
  "hits": [ {SearchQueryRow}, ... ]
  "total_hits": long
  "max_score": double
  "took": long
  "facets": {Facets}
}
```

This can be represented by a `SearchQueryResult` interface with at least the following methods:

| Method           | Response Path    | JSON Type         | Example   | SDK Type |
| ---------------- | ---------------- | ----------------- | --------- | -------- |
| `status()`        | subset of `status`   | Object            | -         | `SearchStatus` |
| `errors()`       | `status.errors`  | Object with string values  | -         | dynamic object with 1 error string per erroring pindex (key being the pindex name) |
| `hits()`         | `hits`           | Array of Objects  | -         | sequence of `SearchQueryRow` |
| `metrics()`      | aggregation of `took`, `total_hits` and `max_score` | - | - | `SearchMetrics` |
| `facets()`       | `facets`         | Object of Objects | -         | `Map` or `Facets` |

The `status` section is represented by both an `errors()` method and a `SearchStatus` class accessible through `status()` method.

The `took`, `total_hits` and `max_score` values are aggregated under a single `metrics()` method that returns a `SearchMetrics` object.

> If this is not considered idiomatic in the SDK language, or should the SDK representation more closely match the JSON structure, the `SearchMetrics` class can be omitted in favor of top-level accessors for each individual metric.

### 4.1. Status and Errors
FTS status and error is represented as a `status` JSON object with a well defined structure. Three `long` fields are always present:

 1. `total` is the total number of FTS `pindex` queried, `total = failed + success`.
 2. `failed` is the number of `pindex` that returned an execution error, >= 0.
 3. `success` is the number of successfully responding `pindex`.

Additionally, if `failed > 0`, an `errors` **object** is also part of the `status`. It has as many entries as _failed_, each key being a pindex name and the value a string representation of the index error.

Note that when all pindexes return errors, the `hits` section of the response can have a `null` value.

The `pindex`-related information can be seen as secondary, and abstracted away in a `SearchStatus` class that will also have a `boolean isSuccess()` method to easily check for success:

 - `totalCount()`: a `long`, number of pindexes, `totalCount = errorCount + successCount`.
 - `successCount()`: a `long`, number of pindexes that answered something.
 - `errorCount()`: a `long`, number of pindexes that failed.
 - `isSuccess()`: a `boolean`, true if the search only returned successful hits (no error) or false.


The `errors` part of other queries usually being represented directly in the Response object in the SDKs, `status.errors` will be represented as a `List<String> errors()` method in `SearchQueryResult`:

 - `errors()`: a sequence of `String`, of size `errorCount()` (so empty if no errors occurred).

#### The HTTP 400 case
For now when the query is malformed a different response format is used. The API should provide a facade over that and **still return a `SearchQueryResult`**. It will have the following default values:

| Method           | Value in case of `HTTP 400` |
| ---------------- | --------------------------- |
| `status().totalCount()`       | 1 |
| `status().successCount()`     | 0 |
| `status().errorCount()`       | 1 |
| `status().isSuccess()`        | false |
| `errors()`       | a single `string` containing the HTTP 400 body |
| `hits()`         | an empty sequence |
| `metrics().took()`            | 0 |
| `metrics().totalHits()`       | 0 |
| `metrics().maxScore()`        | 0.0 |
| `facets()`       | an empty map or equivalent "null object" `Facets` |

The `Exception` representation of this case (see "Execution Error Handling" below) could be a dedicated one, suggested name would then be `FtsMalformedRequestException`.

#### The HTTP 412 case
This is to be treated the same as a 400 error (see above), with the exception of the `errors()` message being standardized:

    "The requested consistency level could not be satisfied before the timeout was reached"

The `Exception` representation of this case (see "Execution Error Handling" below) could be a dedicated one, suggested name would then be `FtsConsistencyTimeoutException`.

#### Execution Error Handling
The SDK other querying APIs have usually only exposed the errors as a separate collection of items to retrieve and iterate through. This is fine for SDKs that can return multiple errors, or don't have the concept of an `Exception`.

This also work for other SDKs in which the "single `Exception` thrown in case of error" is idiomatic (eg. Java), but it is a little bit counterintuitive.

The `errors()` method should always be provided in the synchronous API. Additionally, a SDK may expose a `hitsOrFail()` method that will combine `hits()` and `errors()`. Such a method would either return the `hits` or throw an exception **as soon as there is 1 or more `errors`**.

Since multiple exceptions are usually not possible, a custom `SearchQueryExecution` exception will need to be created in order to accumulate several error messages. If an idiomatic composite exception exists in the standard library / dependencies of the SDK, it may be used instead (or extended).

Finally, if the SDK has an **asynchronous API**, the asynchronous processing of `hits()` should be made possible without the need to asynchronously check and combine on the status of the response. To that end, errors would be notified in the same asynchronous avenue than the `hits()`. This can apply to a form of callback, promise or a ReactiveExtension-like observable sequence. Eg in Java this would be the latter, `Observable<SearchQueryRow> hits()`:

```java
Observable<SearchQueryRow> rows = asyncResult.hits(); // <1>

rows.subscribe(
    row -> System.out.println("match in " + row.id()), // <2>
    error -> System.err.println("error during execution: " + error) // <3>
);
```

Assuming an asynchronous version of the result's hits **(1)**, it would be possible in one operation (subscription) to directly process incoming hits **(2)** or get notified of all errors (in a single notification) **(3)**. The composite exception mentioned earlier would apply in this later case.

### 4.2. Hits
Hits are the proper results of the search. They are represented in the JSON response as an array of objects, which we'll call `SearchQueryRow` (to maintain the theme of the "row" found in both view and N1QL queries):

```
SearchQueryRow {
  "index": string
  "id": string
  "score": double
  "explanation": {JSON object}*
  "locations": {JSON object}*
  "fragments": {JSON object}*
  "fields": {JSON object}*
}
```
Each hit is relative to a document and report its `id` and the `index` that was used. A `score` for the hit conveys the relevance of the hit (things like distance from the original term when fuzziness is set can impact the score for example).

Then each hit can have 4 sub-object (`*` indicate they can be omitted in the response):

 - `explanation`: gives detailed explanations on the hit
 - `locations` indicate where the search terms matched inside the document (in terms of offsets)
 - `fragments` are related to highlighting (giving an excerpt of the document where the matching terms are highlighted)
 - `fields` give the complete value of the included fields where matches occurred (if these fields are stored in the index).

Note that the response's `hits` entry can have a `null` value if all pindexes gave an error.

The SDK representation of hits is a `SearchQueryRow` class (or equivalent structure):

```java
class SearchQueryRow() {
  String index();
  String id();
  double score();
  //see below for details
  JsonObject explanation();
  HitLocations locations();
  Map<String, String[]> fragments();
  Map<String, String> fields();
}
```

#### Explanations
> **WARNING** This section is only included if the `"explain": true` parameter was used at query time.

This is a large and deeply nested JSON object that should be represented in a generic fashion, idiomatic to the language. For example, if the language includes a generic representation of JSON as a `JsonObject`, then this class should be used.

#### Locations
> **WARNING**: This section is only included if fields are hit for which term vectors are included in the index mapping.

An example of the `locations` *JSON object* is:

```json
"locations": {
        "description": {
          "beer": [
            {
              "pos": 3,
              "start": 11,
              "end": 15,
              "array_positions": null
            },
            {
              "pos": 59,
              "start": 325,
              "end": 329,
              "array_positions": null
            }
          ]
        },
        "name": {
          "beer": [
            {
              "pos": 3,
              "start": 11,
              "end": 15,
              "array_positions": null
            }
          ]
        }
      }
```

As we can see, this is a nested structure:

 1. At top level, JSON objects. The attribute name of each object is the name of the `field` it relates to.
 2. In this JSON object we'll have arrays of hit locations. Each array's attribute name is the term it relates to, as found inside that particular field's index. This is the indexed `term` (as opposed to both the query term and the actual occurrence, called a *token*).
 3. The array of hit locations can contain multiple locations. Each is a JSON object with the following structure:

```
HitLocation {
    "pos": int
    "start": int
    "end": int
    "array_positions": array of long | null
}
```

> **To clarify on `array_positions`:**
> this element is `null` when the field isn't a path that contains arrays.
> On the other end, sometimes the term is found nested inside an array. Note that FTS will flatten such structures, so for example if the term is found in an array "`hobbies`" of an array of "`friends`", the field reported would be `friends.hobbies`.
>
> That alone wouldn't help in locating the term in the document, as it can have multiple friends each with multiple hobbies.
>
> In that case, the `array_positions` would contain two values: one that gives the entry to look for in the first array in the path, `friends`, and one that gives the entry to look for in that friend's `hobbies`. Then pos/start/end all relate to that particular entry, where the term is located. For example: `"array_positions": [ 0, 3 ]` for the first friend's fourth hobby.

The proposed pseudocode counterpart for the whole `locations` section is a `HitLocations` class storing `HitLocation` elements. It would make sense to back it with nested `Map` (or equivalent in the target language, eg. hash, associative array...):

```java
class HitLocation {
    @NotNull String field;
    @NotNull String term;
	@NotNull long pos;
	@NotNull long start;
	@NotNull long end;
	@Nullable long[] arrayPositions;
}

interface HitLocations {
	//add a location and allow method chaining
	HitLocations add(HitLocation l);

	//list all locations for a given field (any term)
	List<HitLocation> get(String field);

	//list all locations for a given field and term
	List<HitLocation> get(String field, String term);

	//list all locations (any field, any term)
	List<HitLocation> getAll();

	//size of all()
	long count();

	//list the fields in this location
	List<String> fields();

	//list the terms for a given field
	List<String> termsFor(String field);

	//list all terms in this locations, considering all fields (so a set)
	Set<String> terms();
}

HitLocations locs = new HitLocations();

locs.add(new HitLocation("description", "beer", 3, 11, 15))
	.add(new HitLocation("description", "beer", 59, 325, 329))
	.add(new HitLocation("name", "beer", 3, 11, 15));
```

> An idiomatic structure can be substituted to the `HitLocations` and `HitLocation` classes, as long as the following operations are possible:
>
>  - easy adding of hit location representation in way it can be grown while parsing the chunks of the response
>  - getting all locations (`getAll()`)
>  - getting locations by field and locations by field+term (`get(field[, term])`)
>  - listing fields (`fields()`)
>  - listing terms for a given field (`termsFor(field)`)
>  - listing all terms (`terms()`)

The use of a class would allow for an empty `HitLocations` to be present when the JSON response doesn't contain this section.

#### Fragments
> **WARNING**: This section is only included if fields are hit that are **stored** in the index, **including term vectors**.

An example of the `fragments` *JSON object* is:

```json
"fragments": {
        "description": [
          "…rsey <mark>Beer</mark> Co. is dedicated to crafting quality <mark>beer</mark> for all; from the occasional <mark>beer</mark> drinker to the <mark>beer</mark> aficionado. We believe that good products come from good people, and strive to do our very bes…"
        ],
        "name": [
          "New Jersey <mark>Beer</mark> Company"
        ]
      }
```

It is made of a single JSON object in which each attribute is a field's name (into which some terms matched). The value of each attribute is an array of excerpts from the document, into which hits are highlighted by being put between `<mark>` tags.

As of now, the FTS service only sends a single entry. Note that the underlying Go engine, `Bleve`, has the capacity to return multiple entries so that may happen in the future for FTS as well...

The proposed pseudocode counterpart for the whole `fragments` section is a multi-value `Map` (or equivalent in the target language, eg. hash, associative array...), each entry containing a `sequence` of `strings` (eg. list, array...):

```java
Map<String, String[]> fragments() { }

String[] field1 = new String[] { "…rsey <mark>Beer</mark> Co" };
String[] field2 = new String[] { "New Jersey <mark>Beer</mark> Company" };

Map fragments = new Map();
fragments.put("description", field1);
fragments.put("name", field2);
```

> An adhoc class or structure can be substituted to this simple representation as long as the following operations are possible:
>
>  - iterate over fields
>  - get all fragments for a given field

#### Fields
> **WARNING**: This section is only included if at least one requested `fields` has term vectors included in its index mapping.

An example of the `fields` *JSON object* is:

```json
"fields": {
        "description": "New Jersey Beer Co. is dedicated to crafting quality beer for all; from the occasional beer drinker to the beer aficionado.",
        "name": "New Jersey Beer Company"
      }
```

The fields section outputs complete values from the fields that were requested at query time. It contains one attribute per requested field, mapping to the string of the complete field's content.

> **NOTE**: For the section to appear, some fields must have been requested in the top level `fields` section of the query and the corresponding fields must be **stored** in the index.

The proposed pseudocode counterpart for the whole `fields` section is a `Map` (or equivalent in the target language, eg. hash, associative array...), each entry being the `field -> string value` association:

```java
Map<String, String> fields() { }

Map fields = new Map();
fields.put("description", "New Jersey Beer Co is dedicated to crafting...");
fields.put("name", "New Jersey Beer Company");
```
> An adhoc class or struct shouldn't be needed for this direct `field -> value` association as most languages will have an equivalent. If that was not the case however, the adhoc class/structure would need to allow the retrieval of a value, given a field's name.

### 4.3. Metrics
The `SearchMetrics` aggregates several top-level fields of the JSON response that can be viewed as metrics. This is similar to the way `N1QL` metrics are handled.

> If this is not considered idiomatic in the SDK language, or should the SDK representation more closely match the JSON structure, the `SearchMetrics` class can be omitted in favor of top-level accessors for each individual metric.

| Method | JSON path in response | Json Type | Example | SDK Type |
| ------ | --------------------- | --------- | ------- | -------- |
| `took()`         | `took`           | Number (nanoseconds) | 984127591 | long |
| `totalHits()`    | `total_hits`     | Number               | 6039      | long |
| `maxScore()`     | `max_score`      | Number               | 0.3530367 | double |


### 4.4. Facet Results
The `facets` part of the result, a sibling to `hits`, contains information relative to the facets the user asked for. If no `facets` section was provided in the query, this section is omitted.

Note that the whole `facets` section **is a single JSON object**. The `name` of each facet, which is defined at query time by the user, is represented in the attribute names.

An individual facet result has both metadata and details, as each facet can define ranges into which results are categorized. The JSON representation of a single facet's results looks like this:

```
FacetResult {
    "field": string
    "total": long
    "missing": long
    "other": long
    "terms": [ {TermRange}, ... ] <1>
    "numeric_ranges": [ {NumericRange}, ...] <1>
    "date_ranges": [ {DateRange}, ... ] <1>
}
```
(1) all mutually exclusive (`terms`, `numeric_ranges` and `date_ranges` cannot be combined).

See the following JSON example:

```
"facets": {
    "category": { <1>
      "field": "style",
          ...
      "terms": [ ... ]
    },
    "strength": { <2>
      "field": "abv",
          ...
      "numeric_ranges": [ ... ]
    },
    "updateRange": { <3>
      "field": "updated",
          ...
      "date_ranges": [ ... ]
    }
  }
```
We omitted part of the section, but this shows that we have 3 facets: a _term_ facet **(1)** named "category", a _numeric_ facet **(2)** named "strength" and a _date_ facet **(3)** named "updateRange".

The section could be represented by a `Map` (or equivalent, eg. associative array).

```java
Map<String, FacetResult> facets();
```

It could also be represented by any other adequate `Facets` class or structure, as long as the following operations are possible:

 - iteration of all the facets
 - retrieval of a facet by name

In code, individual facet results could be represented by an interface and three concrete implementations, one for each facet type:

```java
interface FacetResult {
    String name();
    String field();
    long total();
    long missing();
    long other();
}
```

Note the `name` is made part of the `FacetResult`, so that it can be used in isolation.

#### Term Facet Results
```java
class TermFacetResult implements FacetResult {
	//... all from FacetResult, plus:
	List<TermRange> terms();
}
```

The JSON structure of each **term range** is:

```
TermRange {
	"name": string //the "category" or term
	"count": long //how many times this term was seen
}
```
This can be directly mapped to a `TermRange` class or the appropriate structure in the target language.

When requesting a term facet, the user provides a `size` and a `field`. Each term in this field will be considered as a unique range (a "bucket"), and the `TermFacetResult` will contain the first _size_ terms, ordered by occurrence count. So in a `TermRange`, the `name` is the "category" or term and the `count` is the number of times this term was seen.

#### Numeric Range Facet Results
```java
class NumericFacetResult implements FacetResult {
	//... all from FacetResult, plus:
	List<NumericRange> numericRanges();
}
```

The JSON structure of each **numeric range** is:

```
NumericRange {
    "name": string //the name given to the range in facet query
    "min": double //the minimum value considered in the range (inclusive)
    "max": double //the maximum value considered in the range (exclusive)
    "count": long //how many terms were included in this range?
}
```
This can be directly mapped to a `NumericRange` class or the appropriate structure in the target language.

When requesting a numeric facet, the user defines ranges (also called buckets) and gives them names. Note that lower bound is inclusive and upper bound is exclusive, but ranges can overlap so a document can be categorized into several buckets.

#### Date Range Facet Results
```java
class DateFacetResult implements FacetResult {
	//... all from FacetResult, plus:
	List<DateRange> dateRanges();
}
```

The JSON structure of each **date range** is:

```
DateRange {
    "name": string //the name given to the range in facet query
    "start": string //the minimum date ("YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS") in range (inclusive)
    "end": string //the maximum date in range (exclusive)
    "count": long //how many terms were included in this range?
}
```
This can be directly mapped to a `DateRange` class or the appropriate structure in the target language.

When requesting a date facet, the user defines ranges (also called buckets) and gives them names. Note that lower bound is inclusive and upper bound is exclusive, but ranges can overlap so a document can be categorized into several buckets.


# Language Specifics
Each language to provide a representative example of what the API is expected to look like (or does look like if an experimental version is available), as well as any specificities of the implementation in the corresponding SDK.

### Set-Up for Examples
The FTS index "`travel-search`" on the `travel-sample` bucket is necessary for the below examples to work, with a specific index mapping for the `landmark` type:

| Field      | Type | Analyzer | Stored? | Included in `_all` field? | Includes term vectors? |
| ---------- | ---- | -------- | ------- | ------------------------- | ---------------------- |
| `name`     | text | default  | yes     | yes                       | yes |
| `content`  | text | default  | yes     | yes                       | yes |
| `activity` | text | keyword  | yes     | yes                       | yes |
| `country`  | text | keyword  | yes     | yes                       | yes |

### Java
```java
//use the travel sample bucket
Bucket bucket = cluster.openBucket("travel-sample");

//prepare a compound query
AbstractFtsQuery cq =
        SearchQuery.disjuncts(
                //either something like "schnitzle" in the content (boosts the score)
                SearchQuery.match("schnitzle").field("content").fuzziness(2).boost(4),
                //OR some form of "fast food"
                SearchQuery.matchPhrase("fast food").field("content")
        );

//prepare the search on "travel-search" index and set parameters for the whole request
SearchQuery query = new SearchQuery("travel-search", cq)
    //will show value for activity and country fields
    .fields("activity", "country")
    //will include name & content fragments
    .highlight(HighlightStyle.HTML, "name", "content")
    //will have max 3 hits
    .limit(3)
    //will have a "countries" facet on the top 5 countries having landmarks
    .addFacet("countries", SearchFacet.term("country", 5));

//execute the FTS search
SearchQueryResult result = bucket.query(query);

//prints the hits
for (SearchQueryRow hit : result.hitsOrFail()) {
    System.out.println("\nHIT ON " + hit.id() + ", score = " + hit.score());
    System.out.println(hit.fields());
    System.out.println(hit.fragments());
}

//prints the facet
TermFacetResult facet = (TermFacetResult) result.facets().get("countries");
System.out.println("\nCOUNTRY DISTRIBUTION (total " + result.metrics().totalHits() + "):");
for (TermRange range : facet.terms()) {
    System.out.println(range.name() + " (" + range.count() + ")");
}
```
The output of this query is below. Notice the fuzziness allows to find "schnitzel" and the match phrase matches both "fast food" and "fast-food":

```
HIT ON landmark_21741, score = 1.7008879805568502
{activity=eat, country=France}
{name=[Exki], content=[High quality <mark>fast</mark> <mark>food</mark> with an emphasis on freshness and a slight bent for the exotic.]}

HIT ON landmark_40709, score = 1.4730121298166985
{activity=eat, country=United States}
{name=[Gourmet Taco Shop], content=[Tasty and cheap Mexican <mark>fast</mark> <mark>food</mark>. Indoor and outdoor tables, friendly service, and a salsa bar.]}

HIT ON landmark_37879, score = 1.3304809678430451
{activity=eat, country=United States}
{name=[Chateau Edelweiss], content=[Family-owned Swiss restaurant famous for authentic fondue, raclette, and <mark>schnitzel</mark>, with excellent beer on tap.]}

COUNTRY DISTRIBUTION (total 14):
United States (9)
France (3)
United Kingdom (2)
```

### .NET

### NodeJS

### Go

### C

### PHP

### Python

# Signoff
If signed off, each representative agrees both the API and the behavior will be implemented as specified.

| Language | Representative | Date       |
| -------- | -------------- | ---------- |
| Java     | Michael N.     |  |
| ...